My name is Dave Payne.
It's been my privilege over the
past couple of years to have
the opportunity to build and
lead the developer applications
engineering team for Mac OS X.
I stood on this stage a year
ago and described how Apple was
committed to the creation of great
development tools for Mac OS X.
I'm very proud to be back
this year to show how we're
delivering on that commitment.
So what we're going to cover
in this introductory session
this morning is an overview of
Apple's development tool strategy,
a look at all of Apple's
development tools for Mac OS X,
a quick run through with that,
and then start focusing in
on the new Project Builder.
You've probably heard references
to that in a few sessions by now.
I'll be showing you what we
have in Developer Preview 4,
what's coming soon,
and what's on the drawing board,
some things that we're working
on that are a little further out.
And we'll also be touching on some of
the new features of Interface Builder,
and the new Project Builder in DP4.
Then I'll get to some of the
specifics of delivery and deployments
of the new Project Builder.
And because this is an
introductory session,
we have a lot to cover.
I have pointers to numerous other
sessions where you can find more details
about what I'll be talking about here.
So to give the senior management
perspective on Apple's overall
development tool strategy,
I'd like to bring on stage my manager,
Steve Naroff, the Senior Director of
Java and Core Tools.
Steve?
Hi there.
This is an outline of the strategy.
Basically,
we feel strongly that Apple has
to own its own destiny and develop
great tools for our platform.
Aside from developing great IDE,
we need to support the
platform initiatives.
For instance, when we go to new hardware,
the compilers need to support that
hardware in a first-class way.
When we develop new frameworks,
like Cocoa, the IDE has to support
them in a first-class way.
So we have a strong background that,
just as Microsoft uses their tools
to push their platform initiatives,
at Next we have the same background,
and at Apple we want to carry
through that legacy to make
sure when we do do new things,
the IDE is presenting
them in a first-class way.
Another part of our strategy
is to make sure everyone at
Apple is living on these tools.
I've seen a lot of Apple development
efforts over the past decade,
mainly from the outside.
And at least the last one,
which was centered around Dylan,
one of its major flaws was no one
at Apple was actually using Dylan.
Dylan was some really great work
that unfortunately died on the vine
because no one at Apple actually
cared enough to use this stuff.
And in fact, if years ago more folks at
Apple were using this stuff,
Dylan could have been what Java is today.
But unfortunately, that didn't happen.
So what we're hoping is the next time
there's an opportunity like that,
we will make sure we're on top of
it because Apple engineers will in
fact use the stuff we're developing.
And we have support
from the very highest,
part of the company, Steve,
who feels strongly that
we need to do this.
Ten years ago, actually,
I'll show my age here,
more than ten years ago, back in '88,
I was one of the early adopters at
Next of the GNU compiler project.
And it was in its infancy at the time,
but as you know today,
it's the underpinnings
of the Linux movement.
And in fact,
open software is now socially acceptable,
whereas it wasn't 12 years ago.
And we feel strongly that
we need to drive this.
We need to be a major player
in the open source community.
Next was a fairly small company.
Apple's a much larger
company with more resources.
We're putting our resources behind the
open source initiative with Darwin,
and I'm putting my resources
in the tools area behind the
open source movement as well.
We've benefited in many ways already.
Much of the AlteVec support we have
in our GNU compiler was actually
originally done at Motorola.
Because Motorola invests
in the GNU tools.
IBM invests in the GNU tools.
There are countless number of
companies that invest in the GNU tools,
and we want to benefit from
that research and development.
Another thing to mention about the
GNU tools is I think they compile,
the compiler in particular,
compiles more lines of code, I think,
than any other compiler on the planet.
It compiles all of Mac OS X,
it compiles all of Linux,
it's compiled all of Maya,
it's compiled a lot of stuff.
And as a result, it's extremely robust.
It's not a toy.
So, here are other open source projects
you could read that we leverage.
In the Java space,
we're also shipping the Jyx compiler,
which is an open source
Java compiler by IBM.
And even though we want to have a
great fit and finish to our tools,
as you'll see, Project Builder's totally
built with Cocoa and Aqua,
we want to work with third parties.
By no means do we want to close
anyone out of the tools market.
We want to work actively,
and we are working actively
with MetroWorks/Motorola,
Enprize, Pacific Sierra, Absoft,
and lots of others.
We, again,
want to collaborate with these vendors.
Sometimes that may mean
the tools are available or
integrate with Project Builder.
Sometimes that may mean we may take
our tools and integrate with them.
So, it's sometimes unclear
what collaboration means,
but nevertheless, it is a design point.
We do not have any motivation
in owning or being the
exclusive tool on the project.
We are the exclusive tool on the planet,
at least on the Mac platform.
So, here's the thing.
I guess the take-home point
there is competition is good,
and we want to compete,
and we think what we've done that we're
going to show you today is competitive.
A couple notes before
I turn it back to Dave.
One is, even though Mac OS X is in DP4,
this is the first release
of Project Builder.
So it's our, I won't say DP1,
because we've released it internally
for months and have been using it,
but it's our DP2-ish release.
So bear that in mind
when you use the tools.
There's still, we still have a ways to go
before we finish this thing.
There are going to be some bugs,
there are going to be
some missing features,
so I wanted to set that
expectation appropriately.
And...
Well, I guess the last thing is,
what's thrilled me is we've
built a great team over the past
year to deliver this product.
And even though it's not everything we
want it to be at this moment in time,
I'm absolutely confident 100% that
this product will be everything we
want it to be and you want it to be,
because we have a great team in place.
And you'll meet many members of the
team over the course of the talk.
So with that in mind,
I'll hand it back to Dave.
Thank you.
Thanks, Dave.
All right, so diving right in,
let's start looking at the
new Project Builder in TP4.
So first off, what is it?
Project Builder is the new integrated
development environment for Mac OS X.
It's been a long time since Apple's had
an integrated development environment,
perhaps never.
Now, so Project Builder is the
centerpiece of what we're trying to
do with development tools at Apple.
We want to tie many things
that we're doing into this IDE.
There's a number of other components.
We work with the Interface Builder,
User Interface Layout Tool.
We work with the WebObjects tools,
so WebObjects Builder and EOModeler.
We work with a number
of different compilers,
so GCC, as Steve talked about.
We work with the REST for your
Mac Resource Manager resources,
Java compilers like Jyx and Java C.
We work with a variety of debuggers,
like the GDB debugger for
all our C-based languages,
Java debuggers tying into
the virtual machine there.
And we're working with the
AppleScript team on some of these things,
too.
So what all do we need
Project Builder to do for us?
Again, as Steve mentioned,
we want to be able to live on
this tool internally at Apple.
That gives us lots of
great feedback from people.
We have a lot of new customers who are,
it's wonderful,
they're in my face every day.
So, and we also want it to
be a great tool for you.
So, among the requirements,
we need to be able to build
the Core OS itself with it.
And how that translates to you,
if you're developing device
drivers or kernel extensions,
I/O Kit modules, you'll be using the new
Project Builder to do so once we've
got the KDK all put together there.
We build our full-time project.
We build our framework with them.
So, the Carbon framework,
the Cocoa frameworks, Java,
a variety of frameworks there.
And of a special importance to you,
there's a variety of different
types of applications,
as well as plug-in modules, frameworks,
shared libraries that you can build
with the new Project Builder for Carbon,
for Cocoa, for Java, and for WebObjects.
So we did actually have a previous
product that we called Project Builder.
Some of you may have used it.
This was derived from Next.
But when we looked at all the different
requirements that we needed it to solve,
that we need Project Builder
in general to deal with,
we realized that the existing
Project Builder was not really
going to be able to handle it.
So we have completely rewritten
it from scratch for DP4,
but we do need to be able
to import projects from it.
We also would like to be able to
import projects from Code Warrior.
And in fact, in the next session
immediately after this,
we'll be showing that.
And then finally, in order to be a full
Carbon development environment,
the definition of a Carbon application
is it should be packaged in an
application package that's double
clickable on both Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
Currently,
Project Builder is building Maco binaries
that are double clickable on Mac OS X.
We are starting to work on
generation of PEF binaries so
that we can get double clickable
Carbon applications for 9 as well.
So, being a full
Carbon development environment.
So,
in order to meet all these requirements,
again, we decided we need to start over.
So, we did that January of 1999,
so not a tremendously long time ago,
about a year and a half.
I started building the
team at that point,
had approval from senior
management to add more folks.
Some of you may have remembered
last year at WWDC when we showed
a demo of a prototype called PBX.
So, if you hear of anybody else
on stage referring to PBX,
that's because I referred
to it internally as PBX.
The product was called that
up until about a month ago.
But the official name of the
product is now Project Builder
and every time they say PBX,
charge them a dollar and
I'll split it with you.
So, but that was a little scary because
by that point I'd only had two
guys writing code for three months.
So, I beefed up the team considerably
more after that and we got
to an Apple internal rollout
in February of this year.
Now, my team had been developing
Project Builder with Project Builder
for a long time before that.
This was about the time of DP3.
We did not go out on DP3 because
we hadn't had enough internal
feedback yet to tell us all the
ways in which we were brain dead.
So, we've let the internal
developers tell us that.
It's been used widely across Mac OS X.
And now it's your turn to
tell us how we're brain dead.
So, we have our first external release
on the developer preview for CD.
And from here it's onward and
upward for us and the OS onto GM.
[Transcript missing]
The concepts of frameworks is
very important with Mac OS X.
Framework is our shared
library packaging mechanism.
It includes all the, for example,
headers, public headers, documentation,
resources.
Project Builder directly supports
making use of frameworks.
We also let you create bundles.
It's very important to understand
the concept of bundles on Mac OS X.
An application package is a bundle.
Plugins are bundles.
Frameworks themselves are bundles.
Bundles have information property
lists that we know how to edit,
and this is how you would
do your localization through
editing of bundles as well.
So with project layout and editing,
there's a variety of types of
ways to create project templates.
We have a whole bunch of
standard project templates.
You can define your own.
Again, we can import existing projects
from the old Project Builder
and from Code Warrior.
We now have user-definable
groupings of files.
So this is independent of
physical layout on disk,
which was not the case with
the old Project Builder.
It's also independent of
how the build system works.
So we now also support a target model.
You can have multiple build
targets per project and select
which one you want when.
And projects can
reference other projects,
so you can have dependencies on that.
That feature, I guess,
is a little bit yet to come,
but we're working on that one.
On the build system, last year,
when I talked about the build system,
I described the build tool Jam,
that we leverage Jam as
just another make,
a freely available piece of
software that we get off the net.
But what we've done in the meantime
is abstracted things away so you
don't need to have nearly as good an
understanding of the Jam tool itself.
So that's what we use to call
down to all our compilers,
so GCC, Res, Java C, et cetera.
But in the IDE, we take advantage of what
we call build phases.
So there's a variety of
standard build phases for
copying your framework headers,
copying your resource files,
compiling your source code, linking,
et cetera.
And the Jam build tool we are
leveraging at this point to get
automated dependency analysis.
Of course, that's obvious, right?
But well, actually,
our old product didn't do that right.
But there is no need to
go in and edit make files.
So we're handling all this
within the context of the IDE,
and you can customize your build
by adding additional scripts,
custom build phases as necessary.
So as Steve mentioned,
we are taking advantage
of the GCC compiler.
For those of you who knew
the term EGCS or EGGS,
this is that version of the compiler,
GCC 295.
It's the latest.
This is a significant change in the
compiler from what we had before.
This provides full C++ support now,
including an up-to-date standard
template library support.
One thing to note about this is that it
is stricter with ANSI C++ compliance.
So some of the users have told us that,
"Wow,
I found bugs in my code that I didn't
know existed with the previous
compiler." With this compiler,
we have support for the Velocity Engine,
and Steve mentioned the company
Pacific Sierra Research.
That company is working to do an
automatic vectorization support
for Mac OS 9 and for Mac OS X,
because they're working on a
new version of the compiler.
So unless you're familiar with it,
vectorization is a little bit difficult.
So we're working with that company to
try to take full advantage of that.
And again,
it's very important to note that
GCC does build all of Mac OS X,
all the Core OS code,
C-based code for Carbon frameworks
and core foundation.
C++ applications like Finder or Sherlock.
Yes, we do use Power Plant for
some things internally,
so we build that,
our own version of that.
Mac App is now building in
Project Builder and with GCC.
And we also support
Objective-C still as a primary
development language for Mac OS X.
So the Cocoa framework is
written with Objective-C.
The mail application,
Project Builder itself is a
Cocoa and Objective-C application.
And just to note,
you can still write your
Cocoa applications with Java as well.
So Cocoa Java apps.
One final thing is that we actually
do feel that it's very important to be
able to build from the command line.
There's a lot of things you
can leverage in that way.
At Apple, our build and integration
mechanism builds all of
Mac OS X from the command line,
as opposed to firing
up the IDE in any way.
But what we're doing here,
rather than calling Jam directly,
we've put a new command
in place called pbxbuild,
which, of course,
since pbx is a denigrated term,
this stands for Project Builder
External Build Command.
So, with this command,
what we actually do is a very small
application that actually links
with the same framework as the
Project Builder application itself
and actually opens up your project
model and invokes Jam once per target
of the project you're trying to build.
So, you can automate builds
with a shell script,
a nightly build process, for example,
or log in over Telnet and run a build.
I automate my performance testing
and quality testing of the build
system through this mechanism.
So, now, what I'd like to do is bring one
of the engineers up on stage,
Manuel Da Silva, to help me go through a
demo of Project Builder.
The first page is here.
Thank you.
So what we're going to do here
is take a look at an example
project from the system.
So the GLUT Examples is a
project that you would find out
in System Developer Examples,
GLUT Examples.
This is the OpenGL Utility
Toolkit Examples project.
It's got some graphically
cool stuff in it.
We've stripped down this project a bit so
that it's only got a few targets in it.
Let's take a look at what happens
when you first launch the project.
We've tried to, as we're doing with the
finder and with mail,
we're optimizing for use
with a single window here.
As we're showing,
we have a variety of new
projects that you can create.
You can create Carbon applications
or Cocoa applications,
CFPlugin bundles, frameworks.
But we're not going to do that.
We're going to work with
this OpenGL example.
What Manuel has opened here is the
groups and files outline on the left.
On the left, we have tabs that show
structure of your project.
Across the top, we have tabs that are
for tool operations,
so find, build, debug.
So, with the structure here,
we have three of the examples here:
GeoFace, RollerCoaster,
and Use a Sphere Map.
We can open one of those groups,
take a look at the files in that.
We see little circles in the
left-hand column that shows that these
files are built for the particular
target that's our active target.
We can see that up above,
GeoFace is the currently
selected active target.
And down below,
we also see that we're linking
with the GLUT framework,
and you can navigate down
into the headers of that.
So, that's a great way to get started.
We do very directly tie into the
framework mechanisms of Mac OS X.
This is what you do with
the Carbon frameworks,
or Cocoa, or whatever.
So, let's take a look at
how we can do grouping,
for example.
So,
we can select... Let's say that we wanted
to have the source files in a group
and just call them the sources group.
So, we can select them,
create a new group, call that...
Looks like we can move code in there.
We'll show you moving.
Okay, so that's all under sources now.
So again,
no physical tie to the layout on disk.
Now let's take a look at how
you would look at some of
these files in the editor.
We'll click around on a couple of files,
main.m, display.c.
So these all show in the same window.
There's a pop-up here if you want
to go back and forth between files
that you've recently been to.
And you can also use a browser-like
back and forth navigation buttons.
But let's say that you did
want to have a file of source
code off in a separate window.
Just go over to the files
line and double-click to bring
it up in a separate window.
That's got all the features.
You can split the window,
split the panes in the window,
actually bring up even other files in it,
etc.
So a lot of flexibility there.
You can have as many
separate windows as you want.
Now let's take a look
at the file inspector.
So up under the project menu,
show the inspector.
This is where you would set things
like what's the reference style to
how to get to the source code here.
So group relative, project relative,
absolute.
This is also where you would do,
for example, localization.
So if you had an interface builder nib
file and you wanted to localize that,
you would do that from here.
Okay, so let's take a look at building.
So we'll go ahead and just build
the entire GeoFace project here.
GeoFace target,
since this is our active target.
So now this is one of those areas where
we know we need to make some adjustments.
We know we need to make some additional
user interface improvements here.
What's popped down is the
expert mode build panel.
What I was trying to do at Apple was
get this product out usable as
quickly as I could so that I could
stop maintaining the old project
builder that many people were using.
So there are areas of the product
where you'll find sort of expert modes
built in because we haven't quite
had the opportunity to build in all
the nice user interface that would
show which files need to be rebuilt
and which files are building now.
But this has built.
So now let's say that we had
a syntax error in a file.
How would we deal with that?
So let's go ahead and introduce a
syntax file in the head.h file and
save that and then rebuild again.
In this case,
we see up in the build summary that
the number of error messages pop up.
We can select on one of those.
That takes us to the line of code.
Fix the syntax error
there by doing an undo.
And we can undo past the last save.
It's a multi-level undo,
multi-level redo.
And now from here we can rebuild.
And it just goes out and builds
exactly those files that were
dependent on the head.h header file.
And we're successfully built.
And we can go ahead and
launch at this point.
Okay.
So we've launched the target executable.
We can make it do a little dance here.
Also, one thing to note,
Manuel is pressing the A key.
Make him smirk there.
You noticed his lip went up a little bit.
And you're seeing build log
-- or log messages from the
application in the standard
input/output window behind there.
So if you had log messages
you wanted to print out,
for example.
Okay.
So let's quit out of that.
Now let's take a look at target editing.
So if we select the targets
tab over here on the left,
you can see that we've got a
number of different targets.
We'll select the geophase target.
And that brings up a different type
of editor into the main window.
So this editor now shows us
the files and build phases.
This is basically how your build
is going to work for this project
-- what headers we'll deal with,
what bundle resources we'll copy,
what source files we'll build,
and how we'll link.
Build settings -- this is where you
would set the -- if you can go over
to the build settings tab -- this
is where you would set the product
name that's going to be built.
If you were doing an install,
where it would install to.
And down below, you see the editor.
And down below,
you see the expert mode build settings.
So this, again,
is another case of where we need
to provide better user interface.
But with this expert mode,
at least we can get a way of
supplying all the options we need
to today into the build system.
So application settings -- this is
where you would set the information
property list for your bundles.
This is a very important
thing to know about.
Actually, if we can go back to
the simple screen there.
This interface is --
actually has been cleaned up.
But my team moves very quickly.
This is post-DP4 feature here.
You don't have it quite yet.
So what you do have is the
expert mode build settings,
which is a property list editor.
With Cocoa,
we can just leverage an object that we
already had to do property list editing.
And then the final tab for
executables -- for example,
if you were building a bundle that
needed to be debugged within the
context of a given application,
you could say this is the
application that you would launch.
To run that bundle and the
arguments that you would pass to it.
So we can select a
different target up here.
Let's say that we go
to the install target.
And with the install target,
we see some different tabs.
This actually is a legacy target here.
It's an example of how to have a
target that builds something different
than what we have in our build system.
So this is just running
a shell script here.
And then we can copy the example source
code where we needed it on the system.
And then one final target -- let's
take a look at the all examples.
This is an example of an aggregate target
that itself has no build mechanism,
but it does ask other
targets to be rebuilt.
So we have full dependencies
between targets.
And if we build all
examples then at this point,
then it shouldn't need to
rebuild geophase because
that's already been built.
And then it builds the
other two targets as well.
So roller coaster and uses sphere.
Now we see down in the lower left,
build succeeded.
But you see up the top in
the toolbar that the run and
debug buttons are not enabled.
Well,
that's because with an aggregate target,
there is no single executable
to run here at this point.
But by selecting one of the
sub-targets -- so for example,
making roller coaster the active target
-- now we can launch it and watch
the roller coaster come up and spin.
and spin.
So these OpenGL examples are
kind of fun to play with.
All right.
Very good.
So now let's talk about debugging.
With our debugging system,
we have an extensible architecture
that can accept various plugins.
We do communicate with GDB for
debugging of all C-based languages.
GDB is a very well-known Unix,
usually command line, debugger.
We also are working
heavily on Java debugging.
It's not fully functional yet,
but if you've been in
some of the Java sessions,
you've seen some of that.
We're working with the AppleScript team
for debugging of AppleScript.
We've gone to a much more graphical
debugging model than we had before.
So we show threads, stack traces,
variables within a particular
stack frame with breakpoints.
Now,
one thing to know about Project Builder
is that we are designing it to
deal with multiple person projects.
So each person gets their own
preferences per project settings
saved off with the project itself.
It's actually inside the
project document wrapper.
So you could actually check those
into a source code control system,
for example.
And breakpoints is an example of some
of the settings that we store in there.
So you can have them persistent,
not just between runs of the debugger,
but between runs of the IDE as well.
And I can have my breakpoints,
Manuel can have his,
and you can have yours,
all within the same project.
One person told me that
whenever they write code,
they put a breakpoint on it.
And I thought that was a great idea.
Later on, two weeks later,
you go to execute the code and hit
the breakpoint and step through
it the first time you've run it.
Now we can support that.
We can invoke functions to get
the values of opaque data types,
which is very important for
Carbon development today,
and also for core foundation
with functions like CFShow.
From the debugger,
we control the dynamic loader,
what's called DYLD on our system.
So we can control where frameworks
are being loaded in from if
you're doing framework debugging.
So also cross-project debugging.
Part of the reason we've got the one
window there is we expect that you'll
be working with frameworks and perhaps
having frameworks in different projects.
So multiple windows open on
each in its own project window.
And from an application,
you can step right down into the code
of a framework and do cross-project.
So we are taking advantage of GDB.
And I've gone through
many of the features here.
We do have additional
things that GDB provides,
like the ability to set conditions
and commands on breakpoints.
We don't yet have user
interface for that,
but we will have the opportunity to
do so in the future to put that in.
But we do have access to the
GDB command line for any super
power features that those of you
real GDB addicts don't know about.
So we're going to be using that.
Thanks.
So we're going to be using the
GDB command line for any super power
features that GDB addicts want to get to.
There's a number of powerful macro
capabilities that the Carbon team
and the Core OS team are taking
advantage of in a variety of ways.
And we have done some things so
there's faster startup and more
robustness in our DP4 version of GDB.
So now let's take a look
at an example of debugging.
If I could go back to
demo one on both screens,
please.
So this is a given example of
debugging the geophase target again.
So what we want to do is set a
breakpoint on a particular function
that we happen to remember the name of,
so make menus.
So let's bring down the find panel and
show make menus and do a find for that.
So we'll find -- do a
text we'll find right now.
There we go.
And we select on that.
And that takes us to the
line of source code there.
We can put a breakpoint on that.
Now if we want to see
what breakpoints we have,
in our project,
again this is project data,
project structure,
we have another tab to show that.
So we had just put a
breakpoint in main.m,
which is .m is the
suffix for Objective-C.
But it's showing that we already
have a breakpoint on makeface.c.
So this is actually an example
of a persistent breakpoint
that was already out there.
So by double clicking on that,
we can show the specific lines
that the breakpoints are on.
Again,
this is an example of an area where
the user interface has been cleaned
up slightly since DP4 actually.
So let's go ahead and launch the
application under the debugger.
We hit the debug button and the
debug tab pops down and it starts
loading the application into GDB.
and we're off and running.
So now we've hit our first break point.
Let's take a look at some
of the user interface here.
So we have a pop-up menu that shows the
different threads within our application.
We'll leave it on the
Make Face thread for now.
We can walk up and down the stack
trees so we see the variables
changing for each of the stack frames.
Within the variables of
the Make Face function,
we can expand on, for example,
the face argument and see
that that's actually a fairly
complex structure in there.
We're getting all this
information back from GDB.
Now we can close that back
up and do a little bit of
single stepping through here.
We see actually that there's
two loop variables here,
the I and II variables.
And I didn't write this code.
Yeah.
But every time we change a value,
it's showing the changed variable in red,
so kind of what you would expect.
And so if we continue from there,
then we actually march along,
hit the other break point
that we just put in.
Let's single step a little bit
there and then continue again.
and we see the application fire
up under the debugger here.
So debugging fairly nicely tied in,
and again, we're going to do the same
thing with Java debugging.
And I think that's it on that.
All right, we can go back to slides.
Thank you.
So continuing our discussion of
what's in Developer Preview 4,
let's switch to Interface
Builder for a moment.
So what is Interface Builder?
For those of you who
aren't familiar with it,
this is Apple's user
interface layout tool.
The big deal at this point is that
you can create Aqua-compliant user
interfaces for both Carbon and
Cocoa applications with this.
You get all the metrics correct,
etc., the standard menus you want.
For those who've done
Cocoa development in the past,
you're familiar with Interface
Builder in that it's a big part
of the Cocoa development cycle.
It lets you put in actions and outlets
that tie back into the source code.
But you can also, at this point,
use it for your Carbon development.
So when you run Interface Builder,
it generates what's called a nib file,
which is the description
of your user interface.
Again,
we can do that for Cocoa applications,
Carbon, and also for Java clients.
And we can do that for Web objects.
The Interface Builder team has
done a great job of adding in
support for additional platforms,
so if they're down the road become more,
become important,
we'll be able to add that
into Interface Builder.
So how would you take advantage
of this in a Carbon context?
Well, within the Carbon runtime on
Mac OS X and in CarbonLib 1.1 soon,
you have what's called the Interface
Builder Carbon Runtime that takes
the nib file under direction
from your code and loads it in,
and then it builds your
user interface from that.
So this is sort of an alternative
to using the diddles and D-logs and
window definitions and other things
you may be familiar with in the past.
Um, so...
Why might you want to do that?
One advantage is that, again,
it does let you create an
Aqua-compliant user interface.
This does support all the
Carbon user interface elements.
And for those of you who
have been learning about
the new Carbon event model,
where it makes it easier to tie
commands back into your code,
this is a great way,
actually the best way,
of taking advantage of the
new Carbon event model.
This lets you create
Unicode-compliant user interfaces,
and it is tied in with
the new Project Builder,
and we'll continue to tie
it in more tightly as we go.
So I'm not going to demo Interface
Builder in this session this morning,
but 9 a.m.
tomorrow, I believe in this room,
you can come learn much more
about Interface Builder,
both Cocoa and for Carbon development.
Okay, again,
further elaborating on how we're
delivering on our commitment.
Let's show you some of the
things that aren't in this
release but will be coming soon.
I've talked quite a bit about
both Java and AppleScript.
We're trying to broaden the scope
of Project Builder to handle
development of everything that
you'd need to do with Mac OS X.
So, I've got an engineer on my team at
this point who's working heavily
with the Java teams to make sure
that we can build all Java projects
and that we can debug them.
Some of that's been shown
in the Java sessions.
We're working with the Mac Runtime
for Java team to bring some of
the features of their SDK from
Mac OS 9 into the IDE for Mac OS X.
With the AppleScript team,
we're working with Chris Espinoza's
team there to provide an environment
for developing AppleScript.
And then within the IDE,
we're working with the Mac OS X.
So, we're working with the Mac OS X to
develop a new version of the Mac OS X.
So, I've got an engineer on my team at
this point who's working heavily
with the Java teams to make sure
that we can build all Java projects
and that we can debug them.
Some of that's been shown
in the Java sessions.
And then within the IDE itself,
we're working heavily on
better source code navigation,
a number of graphical user
interface improvements,
so some of these you've already seen,
like this information
property list editing,
sorry, couldn't help it,
I already gave a sneak preview of that.
Build tool option settings,
it's very important to us that
we be able to have a much better
graphical user interface for
setting of do I want optimized
code or what level of optimization,
etc.
We'd like to continue refining
our user interface for debugging.
And source code management is a
feature that ever since I first
took the management job here,
the WebObjects team, for example,
has been demanding source
code management features.
So let's talk about...
[Transcript missing]
And another thing that we have built in,
you can see also we have full syntax
coloring here and you can set the
options on how you'd like that to be set.
So one other thing is if
we go to the Find panel,
we can also do a Find Definition
and we'll be working to optimize
user interface on this to make
it more accessible from the code.
But let's say type in "cosang"
which we happen to notice there
and that shows Find Definition.
We can click to go to that.
You see a bookmarker there
so that if it's a framework,
we could go off to the
documentation for that.
Okay, so now let's take a look at
some of the SCM features.
If we take a look at the
Groups and Files view again,
we see that there's a
new column over here,
the SCM column.
And what this shows
us is the SCM section.
So this is the status of
the files in your project.
We see a number of Ms here which
indicate that some of the files
have already been modified.
So let's take a look at one of
those like head.h for example.
Actually Manuel, I don't remember what
we changed in head.h,
do you?
Well, let's find out.
So let's go over and take
a look at the SCM menu.
We could update to the latest revision.
We could compare.
We could commit.
Let's do a compare and
see what's changed.
So we send a message off to the
File Merge graphical diffing tool.
And in that, up we come and we can see
graphically what things have
been changed in this file.
So very cool.
Okay, and so if we quit out of that,
then we can now go ahead and commit
these changes if we like them.
So we can type in a
commit log message here.
[Transcript missing]
So again,
you see the same kind of build output,
the same output lines, CC.
There is a way in the preferences of
Project Builder to get the full build
command of exactly what it's running.
What we've done here,
if we go into the build settings,
we've kind of modified this
project a little bit in
ways that you won't have to.
You can see some of the flexibility.
So with the -b argument,
we can tell GCC that we actually want
to use a somewhat different version of
GCC that generates different output.
And we want to use a
different linker here as well.
So we've also changed the
- in the executables tab,
We've changed now,
we're going to use the launch CFM binary
as what we launch for this application.
But we are passing an argument
which is the full path to
this particular application.
So let's go ahead,
it's been successfully built,
let's hide Project Builder
and we should see the binary
here in our Mac OS X system.
Let's go ahead and copy that
across to the Mac OS 9 system.
Okay,
so I sit here on my Mac OS 9 system.
Let's go back into Project Builder
and we can hit the launch button
from here and actually see the half
binary launched under Project Builder.
And by double clicking here on Mac OS 9,
I see the same binary launched on 9.
So again, this is showing demo of
Carbon scrolling here.
So when we do this for real,
what you'll get by default for
Mac OS X binaries is a Mac O binary
that will let you take advantage
of the full Mac OS X system.
But for demo purposes today,
we're showing PEPF on both sides.
All right, so that's it for our demos.
Thanks very much, Manuel.
And if we can go back to...
Now let's talk about
delivery and deployment.
Now I've mentioned that we have had a
previous version of Project Builder.
Those of you who have been
doing WebObjects development or
Cocoa development are familiar with that.
We're playing a little
shell game here in DP4.
When you look in
System Developer Applications,
Project Builder is the new one.
And we have Project Builder WOA,
which stands for
Project Builder WebObjects.
That is the old one that today would
still be used for WebObjects development,
but that will be changing soon.
So if you are coming new into this,
I would not recommend that you run
the old Project Builder WOA at all.
So for those of you who are
using the old Project Builder,
we will not be shipping that
again unless somebody gives me a
very good reason why I need to.
I have no intent to put any effort
into maintaining that product,
although we will make sure that
the WebObjects customers and
developers are fully taken care of.
But again,
we're working with that team to make
sure that the right things happen,
integrate with the new Project Builder,
and you all want to shift over
if you are using the old one.
In the next session,
they'll show how easy that is to do.
So for delivery,
the decision at this point is that this
is one of Apple's core development tools.
It will be shipped on the quarterly
tool CDs to Apple Developer Connection
program members.
So you get this for free as
part of your monthly mailings.
We haven't done this yet,
so I'm sure there will be some
logistics to work through on this,
but that is the plan.
And we'll also have
web updates available.
Again,
we haven't put one of those out yet,
so I'm sure we'll have a few
logistics to work through there.
For support resources,
we've put a public email list in place,
projectbuilder-users at
public.lists.apple.com.
This is one of the fairly
standard places where these go.
We do have an email list in
place at this point that we've
been getting feedback on.
We have delivered this to a few,
a very small number of
third parties at this point,
who came down for one of our kitchens.
We sent them back with it.
In the kitchen,
they shifted their development
over to the new project builder,
and they're elated with it so far.
Thanks, guys.
There they go.
And then the DTS support mailing list.
So in summary,
you can see that we are delivering on our
commitment to great development tools.
I'm very proud of the team.
We've accomplished.
We've accomplished what
I consider to be a heck of a
lot in the last year and a half.
And in fact,
if I could ask team members to just stand
up and take some acknowledgments here.